docs/reference/declarative_usage.md, before:


## Introduction
### Configuring with YAML
Configure your experiments using a YAML file, which serves as a central reference for setting up your project.
This approach simplifies sharing, reproducing and modifying configurations.

!!! note
    You can partially define arguments in the YAML file and partially provide the arguments directly to `neps.run`.
    However, double referencing is not allowed. You cannot define the same argument in both places.

#### Simple YAML Example
Below is a straightforward YAML configuration example for NePS covering the required arguments.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/simple_example.yaml"
    ```

=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps

    def run_pipeline(learning_rate, optimizer, epochs):
        model = initialize_model()
        training_loss = train_model(model, optimizer, learning_rate, epochs)
        evaluation_loss = evaluate_model(model)
        return {"loss": evaluation_loss, "training_loss": training_loss}

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        neps.run(run_pipeline, run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


#### Including `run_pipeline` in `run_args` for External Referencing
In addition to setting experimental parameters via YAML, this configuration example also specifies the pipeline function
and its location, enabling more flexible project structures.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/simple_example_including_run_pipeline.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    # No need to define run_pipeline here. NePS loads it directly from the specified path.
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

#### Comprehensive YAML Configuration Template
This example showcases a more comprehensive YAML configuration, which includes not only the essential parameters
but also advanced settings for more complex setups.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/full_configuration_template.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    # Executes the configuration specified in your YAML file
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

The `searcher` key used in the YAML configuration corresponds to the same keys used for selecting an optimizer directly
through `neps.run`. For a detailed list of integrated optimizers, see [here](optimizers.md#list-available-searchers)
!!! note "Note on undefined keys in `run_args` (config.yaml)"
    Not all configurations are explicitly defined in this template. Any undefined key in the YAML file is mapped to
    the internal default settings of NePS. This ensures that your experiments can run even if certain parameters are
    omitted.

## Different Use Cases
### Customizing NePS optimizer
Customize an internal NePS optimizer by specifying its parameters directly under the key `searcher` in the
`config.yaml` file.

!!! note
    For `searcher_kwargs` of `neps.run`, the optimizer arguments passed via the YAML file and those passed directly via
    `neps.run` will be merged. In this special case, if the same argument is referenced in both places,
    `searcher_kwargs` will be prioritized and set for this argument.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/customizing_neps_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

For detailed information about the available optimizers and their parameters, please visit the [optimizer page](optimizers.md#list-available-searching-algorithms)


### Testing Multiple Optimizer Configurations
Simplify experiments with multiple optimizer settings by outsourcing the optimizer configuration.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/outsourcing_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "searcher_setup.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/set_up_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

### Handling Large Search Spaces
Manage large search spaces by outsourcing the pipeline space configuration in a separate YAML file or for keeping track
of your experiments.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/outsourcing_pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```

=== "pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_big_search_space.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


### Using Architecture Search Spaces
Since the option for defining the search space via YAML is limited to HPO, grammar-based search spaces or architecture
search spaces must be loaded via a dictionary, which is then referenced in the `config.yaml`.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/loading_pipeline_space_dict.yaml"
    ```

=== "search_space.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/architecture_search_space.py"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_architecture.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


### Integrating Custom Optimizers
For people who want to write their own optimizer class as a subclass of the base optimizer, you can load your own
custom optimizer class and define its arguments in `config.yaml`.

Note: You can still overwrite arguments via searcher_kwargs of `neps.run` like for the internal searchers.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/loading_own_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```



### Adding Custom Hooks to Your Configuration
Define hooks in your YAML configuration to extend the functionality of your experiment.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/defining_hooks.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

Commit message:

update docs regarding argument handling (yaml, func_args)

docs/reference/declarative_usage.md, after:


## Introduction
### Configuring with YAML
Configure your experiments using a YAML file, which serves as a central reference for setting up your project.
This approach simplifies sharing, reproducing and modifying configurations.

!!! note "Argument Handling and Prioritization"
    You can partially define and provide arguments via `run_args` (YAML file) and partially provide the arguments
    directly to `neps.run`. Arguments directly provided to `neps.run` get prioritized over those defined in the YAML file. An exception to this
    is for `searcher_kwargs` where a merge happens between the configurations. In this case, the directly provided arguments
    are still prioritized, but the values from both the directly provided arguments and the YAML file are merged.


#### Simple YAML Example
Below is a straightforward YAML configuration example for NePS covering the required arguments.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/simple_example.yaml"
    ```

=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps

    def run_pipeline(learning_rate, optimizer, epochs):
        model = initialize_model()
        training_loss = train_model(model, optimizer, learning_rate, epochs)
        evaluation_loss = evaluate_model(model)
        return {"loss": evaluation_loss, "training_loss": training_loss}

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        neps.run(run_pipeline, run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


#### Including `run_pipeline` in `run_args` for External Referencing
In addition to setting experimental parameters via YAML, this configuration example also specifies the pipeline function
and its location, enabling more flexible project structures.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/simple_example_including_run_pipeline.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    # No need to define run_pipeline here. NePS loads it directly from the specified path.
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

#### Comprehensive YAML Configuration Template
This example showcases a more comprehensive YAML configuration, which includes not only the essential parameters
but also advanced settings for more complex setups.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/full_configuration_template.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    # Executes the configuration specified in your YAML file
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

The `searcher` key used in the YAML configuration corresponds to the same keys used for selecting an optimizer directly
through `neps.run`. For a detailed list of integrated optimizers, see [here](optimizers.md#list-available-searchers)
!!! note "Note on undefined keys in `run_args` (config.yaml)"
    Not all configurations are explicitly defined in this template. Any undefined key in the YAML file is mapped to
    the internal default settings of NePS. This ensures that your experiments can run even if certain parameters are
    omitted.

## Different Use Cases
### Customizing NePS optimizer
Customize an internal NePS optimizer by specifying its parameters directly under the key `searcher` in the
`config.yaml` file.

!!! note
    For `searcher_kwargs` of `neps.run`, the optimizer arguments passed via the YAML file and those passed directly via
    `neps.run` will be merged. In this special case, if the same argument is referenced in both places,
    `searcher_kwargs` will be prioritized and set for this argument.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/customizing_neps_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

For detailed information about the available optimizers and their parameters, please visit the [optimizer page](optimizers.md#list-available-searching-algorithms)


### Testing Multiple Optimizer Configurations
Simplify experiments with multiple optimizer settings by outsourcing the optimizer configuration.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/outsourcing_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "searcher_setup.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/set_up_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```

### Handling Large Search Spaces
Manage large search spaces by outsourcing the pipeline space configuration in a separate YAML file or for keeping track
of your experiments.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/outsourcing_pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```

=== "pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```yaml
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/pipeline_space.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_big_search_space.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


### Using Architecture Search Spaces
Since the option for defining the search space via YAML is limited to HPO, grammar-based search spaces or architecture
search spaces must be loaded via a dictionary, which is then referenced in the `config.yaml`.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/loading_pipeline_space_dict.yaml"
    ```

=== "search_space.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/architecture_search_space.py"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_architecture.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```


### Integrating Custom Optimizers
For people who want to write their own optimizer class as a subclass of the base optimizer, you can load your own
custom optimizer class and define its arguments in `config.yaml`.

Note: You can still overwrite arguments via searcher_kwargs of `neps.run` like for the internal searchers.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/loading_own_optimizer.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```



### Adding Custom Hooks to Your Configuration
Define hooks in your YAML configuration to extend the functionality of your experiment.
=== "config.yaml"
    ```yaml
        --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/defining_hooks.yaml"
    ```
=== "run_pipeline.py"
    ```python
    --8<-- "docs/doc_yamls/run_pipeline_extended.py"
    ```
=== "run_neps.py"
    ```python
    import neps
    neps.run(run_args="path/to/your/config.yaml")
    ```
